We conducted eQTL analysis in a South African cohort of 67 partici- pants, 35 adult participants with PTSD and 32 adult trauma-exposed controls, using genome-wide genotyping data and gene expression data from whole blood samples. We observed 29 significant cis- eQTLs and 1 trans-eQTL, independent of PTSD status, when using the full genotype dataset (108 937 SNPs and 11 312 genes) as well as two significant cis-eQTLs, also independent of PTSD status, when using a subset of SNPs (5638 SNPs) previously used to construct a polygenic risk score for PTSD in this sample population. We did not observe any significant cis- or trans-eQTLs that may regulate gene expression in a PTSD-dependent manner. Upon further investiga- tion, apart from rs166329, which has previously been associated with the trait “highly strung” (https://www.nealelab.is/uk-biobank) and “feeling tense” (Nagel et al., 2018), none of these eQTLs were found to be associated with psychiatric disorders or symptoms.
We observed 29 known cis-eQTLs (<0.01% of the total number of local 431 587 SNP-gene pairs tested), independent of PTSD diagnoses. These included rs8521 (chromosome 11, C > T) which was associated with a change in the expression of TAGLN and SIDT2. rs8521 is located in the 3′UTR region of SIDT2. Of relevance to this study is prior evi- dence for the role of other TAGLN and SIDT2 genotype variants in MetS in a Korean population (Moon et al., 2018). This finding is of interest due to the high rate of comorbidity between PTSD and MetS (Alves Freire Ribeiro et al., 2020; van den Heuvel et al., 2020; Wolf et al., 2017).
The expression of both AC007278.2 (a non-coding, sense intronic gene) and IL18RAP was associated with rs6758936 (chromosome 2, G > A), an intron variant in Interleukin 18 Receptor 1 (IL18R1), where individuals with the AA genotype had the highest expression levels of AC007278.2 and IL18RAP compared to GG/GA individuals. Of relevance to this study, IL18R1 and IL18RAP were shown to be sig- nificantly enriched in Japanese women with PTSD and high levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), a pro-inflammatory cytokine marker, compared to healthy controls with low levels of IL-6 (Hori et al., 2020). Both IL18R1 and IL18RAP are considered input molecules for interleukin signal- ling and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction (Hori et al., 2020). Therefore, participants with the rs6758936 A allele may have altered levels of other pro-inflammatory cytokines due to the observed eQTL effects on IL18RAP compared to participants with the rs6758936 Gallele, and this may influence immune system function. This is sup- ported by the observation that carriers of the A allele of rs6758936 have a decreased risk for tuberculosis in a cohort of individuals (>46 years old) from Beijing, China (Zhang et al., 2014). In addition, SMG5 and C1orf85 (also known as Glycosylated Lysosomal Membrane Protein [GLMP]) mRNA expression was associated with the genotype of SNP rs933489 (chromosome 1, T > C, SMG5 intron variant). SMG5 mRNA expression was one of the dysregulated genes in an animal model of PTSD that was reversed by puerarin treatment (an alterna- tive plant medicine), which has antioxidant, antidepressant-like and anti-inflammatory properties (Su et al., 2021).

We further focused our eQTL analysis on 5638 SNPs previously used to calculate a polygenic risk score for PTSD in this sample popu- lation and observed two significant cis-eQTLs (<0.01% of the 22 157 local SNP-gene pairs tested) independent of PTSD diagnosis. These were SNPs rs11085906 (chromosome 19, C > T, ZNF333 [Zinc Finger Protein 333] intron variant) and rs3774402 (chromosome 3, A > G, NKTR [Natural Killer Cell Triggering Receptor] intron variant) for which the respective genotypes were associated with the expres- sion of ZNF333 and ZBTB47 (Zinc Finger and BTB Domain Containing 47), respectively. ZNF333 plays a role in DNA-binding transcription factor activity (Jing et al., 2004) and ZBTB47 regulates transcrip- tion by RNA polymerase II (The Alliance of Genome Resources Consortium, 2019). Al-Naama et al. (2020) observed a tendency for zinc finger proteins to be involved in diseases that compromise brain structure and higher-order functions. This may be due to the ability of zinc finger proteins to bind to astrocytes and microglia which can contribute to the levels of the neurotoxin, quinolinic acid, and can aggravate oxidative stress in the brain (Bu et al., 2021). Therefore, individuals carrying the T and G alleles of SNPs rs11085906 and rs3774402, respectively, may be more vulnerable to the effects of oxidative stress on the brain compared to individuals with the C and A alleles of SNPs rs11085906 and rs3774402, respectively.
The single significant trans-eQTL observed, independent of PTSD status, was rs397435 (chromosome 16, G > A, NADH:Ubiquinone Oxidoreductase Subunit B10 [NDUFB10] intron variant) and Ribosomal Protein S2 Pseudogene 5 (RPS2P5), involved in ribosome biogenesis. rs397435 is a known eQTL for NDUFB10, SNHG9, RPS2 and AC005363.9 in whole blood and brain tissue (GTEx). NDUFB10 is involved in the mitochondrial respiratory chain, more specifically mitochondrial complex 1 (Nicholls & Ferguson, 2013). Gene ex- pression changes in the mitochondrial complex 1 have been linked to other disorders such as schizophrenia and paranoid personality disorder (Haghighatfard et al., 2018). Further, mitochondrial dys- function has been known to play a role in depression via increased mitochondrial DNA damage and oxidative stress, which may lead to increased apoptosis, inflammation and dampened synaptic plasticity and neuronal differentiation (Allen et al., 2018, 2021). Interestingly, several genes related to ribosomal machinery (RPS27, RPS3A, RPS15, RPS7, RPS17) were previously found to be differentially expressed in PTSD cases compared to trauma-exposed controls in this cohort (Hemmings et al., 2022). However, Hemmings et al. (2022), utilised a larger sample and did not stratify by genotype, therefore there may have been slightly less statistical power in this analysis to identify the case–control association previously observed.

he eQTLs identified in the current study are known eQTLs, i.e., the associations between genotype and gene expression have been observed in the GTEx database, thereby validating previous findings as well as supporting the analytical approach in this present study. In addition, the range of genes identified is in line with the com- plexity of transcriptomic mechanisms/networks found in psychiatric disorders. Further support for our findings comes from Universal Protein Knowledgebase functional annotation. The molecular func- tion and biological process data show that several genes are impli- cated in each of several broad mechanisms, including the immune response or inflammation, apoptosis, and energy metabolism, which have been implicated in PTSD (Chen et al., 2020; Katrinli et al., 2022; Somvanshi et al., 2019). Several of the genes identified, and by ex- tension, their associated pathways, are thought to be broadly im- plicated in the development of psychiatric disorders. However asno outcome measures were used to guide preliminary global eQTL searches independent of case/control status, one would not expect to observe any subnetworks or pathway enrichment findings reflec- tive of a clearly defined phenotype.

Importantly, we attempted to identify SNPs that are differen- tially associated with a change in gene expression in PTSD partici- pants compared to trauma-exposed controls. We did not, however, observe any significant SNP × PTSD status interaction effects on gene expression. In comparison to the global SNP results, only a small fraction of the top (yet, non-significant) interacting SNPs are known eQTLs. It is important to mention that eQTL effects may not be a product of a single SNP-gene pair, but rather the overall cumu- lation of many networking molecular interactions (Shan et al., 2019). Therefore, even though the interacting SNPs identified in this sam- ple are not known eQTLs for the identified respective associated genes, it is possible that these SNPs influence the gene expression of genes upstream of the ones observed in this study. For example, the top observed local interacting SNP when using the full dataset was rs1449562 (chromosome 12, G > A, HPD intron variant). rs1449562 is a known eQTL for HPD, Proteasome 26S Subunit, non-ATPase 9, and Long Intergenic Non-protein Coding RNA 1068 (GTEx). In this study, although not statistically significant, rs1449562 impacted the expression of DIABLO, also known as SMAC/DFNA64) differ- ently in PTSD cases versus controls. Control participants with the AA genotype had the highest expression of DIABLO compared to GG/GA control participants, which contrasted with PTSD par- ticipants, where those with the AA genotype who had the lowest DIABLO expression levels compared to PTSD participants with GG/ GA genotypes. In the mitochondria, DIABLO counters the activity of an inhibitor of apoptosis protein to promote apoptosis (Cheng et al., 2011). Mitochondria-related alterations and dysregulation are suggested to be prevalent in stress-related disorders such as PTSD and depression (Allen et al., 2021).

Though genome-wide genotyping and gene expression assays provide rich data and potentially nuanced insights into molecular ae- tiology, several factors must be considered when interpreting results and placing them in the context of existing literature. Transcriptomic assessments provide a single snapshot of processes that are dynamicand may show regional variation. Messenger RNA undergoes a con- tinual cycle of synthesis and degradation, the balance of which is carefully determined by physiological and environmental influences. As such, gene expression in the acute aftermath of trauma exposure may differ from that associated with PTSD in the long-term (Segman et al., 2005). For example, in the first study to examine peripheral gene expression signatures predictive of PTSD development, Segman et al. (2005) found that differences in the levels of transcripts known to be expressed in the hippocampus differed significantly according to PTSD status immediately post-trauma exposure but not 4 months thereafter. Furthermore, evidence exists for heterogeneity in gene expression based on cell type. This occurs not only at the tissue level, for example, between brain and blood, but also within tissues, with previous studies showing that transcriptomic profiles in both blood (Kuan et al., 2019) and brain (McKenzie et al., 2021) tissue differ ac- cording to cellular composition. Studies examining gene expression may also be influenced by the effects of stress-associated neuroen- docrine signalling on peripheral blood mononuclear cell proportions (Dhabhar et al., 2012), an important consideration in PTSD given the evidence for a role for chronic hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis dysregulation in the disorder (Dunlop & Wong, 2019). With re- spect to genetic influences on PTSD, the identification of variants conferring relative risk or resilience is confounded by ancestry, with the latest Psychiatric Genetics Consortium PTSD workgroup results finding that genome-wide significant hits in one ancestry group do not replicate to others (Nievergelt et al., 2019). It can thus be diffi- cult to interpret findings in an admixed population group when the majority of existing PTSD genetic investigations have been con- ducted in populations of European ancestry. For the same reason, the accuracy with which genotypes can be imputed for an admixed population is limited given the relative dearth of suitably large and diverse reference panels (Chatzinakos et al., 2021). In this study, we chose not to impute the genotype data in order to maintain high va- lidity genotypes as to not introduce inaccuracies or genotypes not applicable to this population group through imputation. However, this consequently limited the number of SNPs available for analysis.
In addition to genomic considerations, several factors related to trauma exposure and PTSD phenotype should be borne in mind, traumatic experiences can vary substantially based on their nature, duration, frequency, and intensity, and it is possible that overt and subtle differences in trauma experience, and interindividual dif- ferences in those exposed, may be mirrored by a range of possible molecular mechanisms underlying the response to its occurrence. For example, a study that used eQTLs to impute gene expression profiles in PTSD cases based on available GWAS data found sig- nificant predicted differences in transcriptomics between cohorts comprised of civilian and military participants (Huckins et al., 2020). Though such study group effects are not direct proxies of trauma type, it does suggest the existence of different genetic contributions to PTSD aetiology. Distinct genetic mechanisms may also underlie the presentation of specific symptoms or symptom clusters in PTSD. Assessment of gene expression differences based on case–control status cannot capture relationships between gene expression and these PTSD endophenotypes. Therefore, whether eQTLs associated with specific aspects of symptomology are revealed is based on the analytic approach i.e., the assessment of individual or cluster symp- tom scores, and the phenotypic profile of the study group. Finally, it is possible that eQTL findings may not represent the effects of PTSD alone but rather the aggregate effects of PTSD, lived experience, and any comorbid conditions.
This study is subject to several limitations. Perhaps chief amongst these is the relatively small sample size. Due to insufficient power, few SNP-gene pair relationships survived multiple correction, pre- cluding the possibility of conducting a network/enrichment analysis and gaining further mechanistic insight into PTSD pathophysiology. The small study group also limited our ability to examine the poten- tial effects of confounding variables, such as sex and comorbidities, and we were required to only investigate SNPs with a MAF > 10% in order to prevent genotype groups with an n of 1. Furthermore, when looking at the effects of an interaction, one should control for the effects of covariates on the interaction by including additional inter- action terms (SNP*cov1 + SNP*cov2 + ... + case/control*cov1 + case/ control*cov2 ...) (Keller, 2014), which this study was not sufficiently powered to do. Another key consideration is the source of our gene expression data. This study utilised gene expression data from whole blood tissue, which is only moderately correlated with gene expres- sion in brain tissue (Sullivan et al., 2006). Blood eQTLs have been shown to reflect <50% of brain cis-eQTLs (Bhalala et al., 2018) and, as a result, blood-based eQTL analysis may miss brain tissue-specific eQTL effects. Nevertheless, the inaccessibility of brain tissue ne- cessitates the use of a peripheral surrogate marker and, therefore, analyses in blood hold a higher potential for clinical utility.
This study has several strengths. Careful and detailed phenotype information is available for the study cohort, and the inclusion of trauma-exposed controls allowed us to parse the effects of PTSD in our eQTL analysis. Our study recruited participants from an un- derrepresented population in psychiatric genetics. Participants in this study self-reported as belonging to the South African Coloured population group, a uniquely 5-way admixed population group pre- dominately found in the Western Cape Province of South Africa. We elected to use the MEGA array for genotyping, which was designed o better characterise ancestral populations and provide insight into diverse population groups. Though there is a clear benefit in in- creasing diversity in psychiatric genetics studies, there is no suitable genome reference panel available for this population group. We, therefore, elected not to impute genotype data and only assess vari- ants included on the array. Consequently, we have a smaller number of variants to assess but are confident of the validity of our genotype data in this unique population group. Finally, our analytic approach was two-fold. We used an agnostic exploratory approach in our as- sessments using the full complement of available genotype data, as well as a semi-targeted approach in seeking to identify whether any of the variants included in our PTSD PRS in this cohort act as eQTLs.
Future studies will need to make use of larger cohorts and may consider examining gene expression data over a series of time points in various tissues or cell types to capture the dynamics of the tran- scriptome, subsequent to trauma exposure. Furthermore, additional omic-layers (e.g., DNA methylation, proteomics, etc.) will support and help interpret findings. In short, continued work is required in both transcriptomic and genetic fields, including the development of human genome reference panels with greater geographic and ethnic (particularly African) representation.
Here we sought to provide insight into the molecular mech- anisms underlying PTSD in a non-European sample population. However, we did not identify any eQTLs specific to PTSD. Despite several factors needing to be taken into consideration, this study is one of the first studies to investigate eQTLs associated with PTSD in a South African 5-way admixed population and should encourage much-needed further research.
