Abstract of Research Project
The primary brain tumour glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is notoriously resistant to therapy, and the inability of GBM to undergo apoptosis after treatment is believed to be key for therapy resistance. We have evidence that the transcription factor BCL6 is induced in GBM in response to DNA damage induced by radiation and chemotherapy, that it is transcriptionally active, and that it contributes to survival of GBM cells after treatment with DNA damaging agents. The expression and activity of BCL6 will be examined in human and mouse intracranial GBM models treated with chemotherapy and/or radiation, to determine the ability of BCL6 inhibition to sensitise GBM to DNA damaging agents. The mechanisms of action will be determined by identification of target genes and pathways regulated in a BCL6- specific manner after therapy. If apoptosis can be induced by BCL6 inhibition in vivo, this could be translated to people with GBM, as our collaborators have developed an FDA approved BCL6 inhibitor in clinical trial.


Media Summary of Research or Project (100 words maximum) – Explain the research project, and its significance to cancer prevention or treatment, in language understandable to the public as a press release.

We have found that cells isolated from patients with brain tumour glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) have increased expression of the cell survival factor BCL6. BCL6 seems to contribute to the notorious resistance of GBM to radiation and chemotherapy, which leads to the poor prognosis for people with this disease. We will use primary GBM cells isolated from patient tumours and tumour models in mice to determine whether BCL6 inhibitors can increase sensitivity to the current therapies available for these patients, radiation and temozolomide chemotherapy. This study could lead to new treatment regimes for people with GBM .
Section 2 – Description of Proposed Research Project (6 page maximum including references)

Objectives
The primary brain tumour glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is notoriously resistant to therapy. People with this cancer have a median survival of around 18 months from diagnosis, even with best treatment – surgery, ionising radiation and temozolomide chemotherapy. The inability of GBM to undergo apoptosis after treatment is believed to be a key reason for resisting therapy and consequently the dismal prognosis for people with GBM. However, the mechanism of apoptosis resistance after DNA damage in GBM is not well defined. We have evidence that the transcription factor BCL6 is induced in GBM in response to DNA damage induced by radiation and chemotherapy, that it is transcriptionally active, and that it contributes to survival of GBM cells after treatment with DNA damaging agents (Fabre et al, manuscript in preparation). The specific objectives of this project are:
1.	To confirm that BCL6 induction is part of the cellular response to DNA damaging therapy, in human and murine intra-cranial tumour models of GBM.
2.	To determine whether inhibition of BCL6 will sensitise GBM mouse models to radiation or chemotherapy.
3.	To identify the target genes regulated by BCL6 in response to DNA damage, and determine how they contribute to the anti-apoptotic, pro-survival activity of BCL6 in GBM.
Background
Glial cell tumours, glioma, occur in different grades, from low grade to grade 4 glioma glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). GBM is the most common glioma in adults, the most aggressive and is effectively incurable. The standard treatment for GBM is surgery, radiation and chemotherapy with temozolomide (TMZ), but resistance to treatment is almost universal, and the best 5 year survival rate is less than 10%1.
Several candidates have been proposed as chemo-resistance factors in GBM. The best- studied resistance factor in chemotherapy resistance in GBM is MGMT2. MGMT is expressed in ~65% of primary and 25% of secondary GBM, and repairs TMZ-induced methylguanine DNA adducts, the damage that kills the cell. However, ~50% of GBM do not express MGMT but the success of TMZ in these people can be modest at best3. This suggests that more ubiquitous factors mediate therapy resistance. The vast majority of GBM have mutations that activate the PI3K/AKT/mTOR signalling cascade4, a well recognised pro- survival pathway in cancer. Many drugs have been designed to block EGFR/PI3K and mTOR signalling, but all have been ineffective against GBM. Even drug combinations that target the signalling cascade at multiple levels result in a cytostatic effect in vitro and negligible efficacy in vivo5 . This implies that another factor or factors control GBM chemo- resistance. The reluctance of GBM to apoptose after therapy is considered the primary hurdle in therapy-mediated killing6. This suggests an over-riding anti-apoptotic mechanism is present in GBM, and is activated or enhanced by therapy.
BCL6 – Transcriptional repressor and chemo-resistance factor
The proto-oncogene BCL6 is a transcription factor first identified in diffuse B-cell lymphoma7. BCL6 is a transcriptional repressor normally expressed in immune cells during antigen-driven maturation, which requires physical breaks and recombination of the DNA encoding the immunoglobulin genes8. BCL6 blocks expression of checkpoint genes that normally induce apoptosis in response to DNA damage, particularly the ATR gene, a direct sensor of DNA damage. This prevents signalling through the ATR-CHK1-p21 signalling
pathway and subsequently bypasses apoptosis, allowing the maturing immune cells to survive the genomic remodelling that is required.
Inappropriate BCL6 can be oncogenic due to the loss of these DNA damage and cell cycle checkpoints, which provides both survival and proliferative advantage to the cancer cell9. While over-expression in lymphoma most often occurs via chromosomal translocation at the BCL6 locus, dysregulation of the upstream signals that regulate BCL6 can also lead to over- expression, as can modifications such as acetylation and ubiquitinylation that increase BCL6 levels and oncogenic potential. BCL6 can similarly bypass apoptosis induced by therapy. If BCL6 is present in a cell treated with chemotherapy or ionising radiation, then signals arising from DNA damage may fail to activate checkpoints, allowing the cell to survive, and BCL6 has been associated with chemo-resistance in lymphoma10. Importantly, BCL6 does not need to be constitutively expressed in order to mediate therapy resistance, but can be induced by therapy. Treatment of leukaemia cells with tyrosine kinase inhibitors rapidly up-regulated BCL6 transcription11, with consequent repression of BCL6 target genes. Similarly, BCL6 was increased by treatment of lymphoma cells, and a variety of solid tumour cell lines, after exposure to DNA damaging chemotherapy (Ari Melnick, personal communication).
With convincing evidence for BCL6 oncogenic activity in lymphoma and leukaemia, a specific cell-permeant peptide inhibitor of BCL6 has been developed. Called RI-BPI, this peptide blocks the interaction of BCL6 with the SMRT-NCoR-BCoR transcriptional repression complex, specifically impeding the cell survival function of BCL6. This kills BCL6-positive lymphoma cell lines and primary human lymphoma cells in vitro, and several human xenograft lymphoma models in vivo12. BCL6 inhibition also sensitised highly drug- resistant leukaemia stem cells to tyrosine kinase inhibition 11. Based on these data, RI-BPI is now in phase I clinical trial in BCL6-positive lymphoma, with support from the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society of the USA, one of the first drugs developed to specifically target a transcription factor.
Other than lymphoma and leukemia, BCL6 has occasionally been found in other tumours. In breast, BCL6 reportedly drives oncogenicity and survival13. There have been sporadic reports of BCL6 expression in sarcoma and other stromal-derived tumours, with up to 50% of synovial sarcoma with nuclear BCL614 suggesting potential activity, but to date there is no functional data on BCL6 mediating chemo-resistance in any solid tumour.In addition to our observed induction of BCL6 in primary GBM cells in response to therapy (Fig 1), independent evidence for BCL6 involvement in GBM is growing. The amount of BCL6 transcript in glioma relative to normal brain increases with grade, but is not elevated in non-glioma cancers such as medulloblastoma or meningioma (Fig 2). Analysis of genomic copy number variation and survival of GBM patients demonstrates that loss of the BCL6 locus increases survival compared to tumours with BCL6 amplification, although numbers are small. Finally, a gene signature that differentiates short-term from long-term GBM survivors has been developed that includes both BCL6 and the BCL6 target gene EP30015.

Research Hypothesis, Design and Methods
We observed the accumulation of BCL6 protein in GBM cells after treatment with both ionising radiation and chemotherapy.
We hypothesise that BCL6 is a major contributor to the anti-apoptotic mechanism in GBM, by silencing key genes involved in the normal apoptotic response to DNA damage.
Design and Methods
1.	Confirm induction and activity of BCL6 in vivo
GL261 (a murine glioma) and U87-MG (a human GBM cell line) will reliably grow outside of the brain. Each line will be transplanted sub-cutaneously (C57/BL6 and NOD/scid mice respectively), and allowed to form a palpable tumour. Once tumours are established, mice will be treated with temozolomide (oral gavage, 66 mg/kg daily16) or the appropriate control. Tumours will then be collected at various times after treatment, and induction of BCL6 compared between untreated and TMZ-treated tumours using immunofluorescence microscopy, western blot, or flow cytometry. The overall effect of treatment on tumour progression will be detailed. The basal level of apoptosis will be measured using antibodies against active caspases and annexin V in flow cytometry, or the activation of the cell- permeant apoptosis indicator dye Flivo in tumour bearing mice treated immediately before sacrifice.
Sub-cutaneous tumours grow rapidly and are convenient to monitor tumour progression. However, they do not represent the appropriate tumour environment for GBM, so U87-MG or GL261 will be implanted into the brain of NOD/scid or C57/BL6 mice under our standard protocol. Three to four days prior to becoming symptomatic, mice will be treated with
ionising radiation according to our standard protocol, or TMZ chemotherapy, and tumours collected. BCL6 induction and basal apoptosis will be determined as above.
2.	Determine the effect of BCL6 inhibition on tumour outcome
Inhibition of BCL6 oncogenic activity has been successfully performed in mice with lymphoma and leukemia by either the RI-BPI peptide mimetic, or by a series of small molecule inhibitors. Both of these are available to us through our collaboration with Professor Ari Melnick, and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic data from rats demonstrated that RI-BPI can accumulate to sufficient concentration in the brain for activity, suggesting that treatment of brain malignancies with RI-BPI should be effective (Melnick, personal communication). Delivery of both ionising radiation or TMZ chemotherapy to intra-cranial U87-MG tumour-bearing mice will be repeated in the presence of the BCL6 peptide inhibitor RI-BPI, delivered intra-peritoneally to determine the effect on apoptosis in the tumours, and the outcome for tumour progression or regression. The U87-MG BCL6 knockout line created in Objective 3 will also be transplanted intracranially, to determine the contribution of BCL6 to tumour growth and efficacy of therapy.
3.	Identify the target genes regulated by BCL6 in GBM.
We have demonstrated by reporter assay that BCL6 induced by therapy has transcriptional repression activity. Expression of BCL6 target genes from lymphoma, including ATR, CHEK1, and EP300, was examined by quantitative RT-PCR in primary GBM cells at various times after treatment. This analysis suggested that BCL6 might not target the same genes in brain cells as in blood cells, and is borne out by similar findings in breast cancer13 While we will continue to analyse expression of potential BCL6 candidate genes in GBM, to discover new pathways regulated by BCL6 in GBM we will use two approaches.
Firstly, chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing (ChIP-seq) will be used to identify direct BCL6 targets in GBM cells after treatment from the NZG primary GBM cells, a series of GBM cells isolated from surgical specimens in our laboratory. We have established the preparation and precipitation of chromatin-bound proteins from NZG cells in our laboratory, and will collaborate with the Melnick laboratory at Weill Cornell Medical College to analyse the BCL6-associated genomic DNA sequences in GBM. This is a standard technology in their group, and the data will be compared to their BCL6 ChIP-seq data from breast cancer, lymphoma and leukaemia.
Secondly, zinc finger nuclease technology will be used to generate a series of BCL6 somatic cell knockouts in the NZG primary cells. The knock-out lines will be treated with ionising radiation or temozolomide, and compared to BCL6 replete cells. Global gene expression will be analysed by either Nanostring codesets or RNA sequencing, and the BCL6-specific transcripts will be distinguished from the general response to therapy. These will be compared to the ChIP-seq data to determine the direct and indirect effects of BCL6 on differentially expressed genes and pathways. Gene set enrichment analysis will be used to look specifically at the DNA damage response, and how it interfaces with BCL6 activity.
The BCL6 locus will also be knocked out of the U87-MG line, and the effect on tumour growth and response to therapy determined.
Relevance to Cancer Prevention or Treatment
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary brain tumour, with approximately 120 new diagnoses each year in New Zealand. The prognosis of GBM patients is usually described as ‘dismal’, since GBM do not respond well, if at all, to treatment. While all patients receive radiation and temozolomide, few patients see long-term benefit from treatment. Similarly, most GBM have highly active receptor tyrosine kinase pathways EGFR/PI3K/AKT/mTOR survival pathways, but direct inhibition of these pathways has not been effective against GBM, either in vitro or in patients. This resistance of
GBM to therapy is due in large part to the reluctance of GBM cells to undergo apoptosis, which can be observed in vitro and in tumours. Many research groups are working to develop new therapeutic strategies for GBM, including our laboratory, but without reversal of the apoptosis block, success is unlikely.
We hypothesise that BCL6 is a strong candidate for mediating chemo-resistance via apoptosis bypass in GBM cells. This is based on the BCL6 induction observed after therapy in vitro, and the data demonstrating the same phenomenon in lymphoma and leukaemia in vitro and in vivo. This proposal will determine whether BCL6 over-rides the effect of chemotherapy and targeted therapy in GBM, as it does in hematologic malignancy, and whether this can be reversed. If this is the case, then knowledge gained from this research project could directly inform clinical practice and support the application of recently developed BCL6 inhibition therapies to GBM, which are currently FDA approved and in clinical trial in North America. It supports a new collaboration between the McConnell and Melnick laboratories, which gives New Zealand researchers access to the resources of a large, very successful lab. This collaboration could be extended to the clinic to give New Zealand cancer patients potential access to a novel treatment for lymphoma and leukaemia, as well as for GBM.

Relevant Previous work by applicant(s) which is relevant to this project
The data presented here were supported in part by the grant BCL6 and Chemoresistance: A new target for glioblastoma multiforme therapy? from Genesis Oncology Trust April 2012 – March 2013. This allowed us to establish the project and the collaboration with the Melnick laboratory, which led to further funding from the Cancer Society of New Zealand.
The description of BCL6 induction in human GBM cells in vitro, and expression in human GBM and mouse tumours in vivo is all but completed and a paper is ready for submission. This proposal takes the next step and asks whether blockade of BCL6 activity will be useful for treatment of GBM.
We have experience in murine intracranial tumour models17,18 and radiation therapy19,20, including in vivo irradiation of intracranial tumours (in press, Frontiers in Oncology) chromatin immunoprecipitation21,22 and skills in analysis of transcriptome data23, which will be done in collaboration with colleagues both at the Malaghan Institute and in the Melnick lab and Epigenomics core facility at Weill Cornell Medical College.
This proposal is a key part of a coordinated programme of research into GBM therapy resistance. Projects in our group examine the relationship between cancer stem cells and therapy resistance, the way TMZ chemotherapy influences tumour-immune cell interactions, and how radiation resistance might be modified, for good or for bad, by the use of complementary therapies such as high-dose ascorbate.
