Blood Pressure, Hypertension, and the Risk of Aortic Dissection Incidence and Mortality: Results From the J-SCH Study, the UK Biobank Study, and a Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies

BACKGROUND: Hypertension or elevated blood pressure (BP) is an important risk factor for aortic dissection (AD); however, few prospective studies on this topic have been published. We investigated the association between hypertension/elevated BP and AD in 2 cohorts and conducted a meta-analysis of published prospective studies, including these 2 studies.
METHODS: We analyzed data from the J-SHC study (Japan-Specific Health Checkups) and UK Biobank, which prospectively followed up 534 378 and 502 424 participants, respectively. Multivariable Cox regression was used to estimate hazard ratios and 95% CIs for the association of hypertension/elevated BP with AD incidence in the UK Biobank and AD mortality in the J-SHC Study. In the meta-analysis, summary relative risks were calculated with random-effects models. A potential nonlinear dose-response relationship between BP and AD was tested with fractional polynomial models, and the best-fitting second- order fractional polynomial regression model was determined.
RESULTS: In the J-SHC study and UK Biobank, there were 84 and 182 ADs during the 4- and 9-year follow-up, and the adjusted hazard ratios of AD were 3.57 (95% CI, 2.17–6.11) and 2.68 (95% CI, 1.78–4.04) in hypertensive individuals, 1.33 (95% CI, 1.05–1.68) and 1.27 (95% CI, 1.11–1.48) per 20–mmHg increase in systolic BP (SBP), and 1.67 (95% CI, 1.40–2.00) and 1.66 (95% CI, 1.46–1.89) per 10-mmHg increase in diastolic BP (DBP), respectively. In the meta-analysis, the summary relative risks were 3.07 (95% CI, 2.15–4.38, I2=76.7%, n=7 studies, 2818 ADs, 4563 501 participants) for hypertension and 1.39 (95% CI, 1.16–1.66, I2=47.7%, n=3) and 1.79 (95% CI: 1.51–2.12, I2 = 57.0%, n=3) per 20–mm Hg increase in SBP and per 10–mmHg increase in DBP, respectively. The AD risk showed a strong, positive dose-response relationship with SBP and even more so with DBP. The risk of AD in the nonlinear dose-response analysis was significant at SBP >132 mm Hg and DBP >75 mm Hg.
CONCLUSIONS: Hypertension and elevated SBP and DBP are associated with a high risk of AD. The risk of AD was positively dose dependent, even within the normal BP range. These findings provide further evidence for the optimization of BP to prevent AD.

Aortic dissection (AD) is a relatively rare but serious disease that often leads to catastrophic complications or death. The reported incidence of AD is 3 to 6 cases per 100000 persons per year in Europe and the United States.2 To date, results from only a few epidemiological cohort studies have been published on risk factors for AD because of the low incidence of the disease, which would require large sample sizes or long follow-up periods to accrue sufficient numbers of cases for statistical analyses. This has, in turn, limited our understanding of primary prevention routes. 
Hypertension is associated with aortic wall stress and is a risk factor for AD. A high prevalence of hypertension was reported in patients who developed AD (67.3%– 76.6%).3,4 Most of the previous studies that investigated the association of AD with hypertension were based on case series.1,3,4 Only a few prospective cohort stud- ies have assessed the association between blood pres- sure (BP) or hypertension and AD5–8; however, these studies were often small in scale with a limited number of AD cases and therefore had limited power to inves- tigate the dose-response relationship between systolic BP (SBP) or diastolic BP (DBP) and AD across the full range of BP values. It is therefore important to clarify. 
both the strength and shape of the association between elevated BP or hypertension and the risk of AD, both from the clinical and public health perspectives and for risk assessment. 
In the Global Burden of Disease Project, results for the association between elevated BP and aortic aneu- rysm have been incorporated into the most recent risk assessment,9 but data on elevated BP and AD were not included, most likely because of the limited cohort data available and a lack of any meta-analyses summarizing the available evidence. To fill these gaps, we analyzed data from 2 prospective cohort studies, each of which consists of approximately a half-million participants, conducted in Japan and the United Kingdom. We then summarized the evidence from these 2 cohort studies and previously published cohort studies in a systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective studies.
METHODS 
Japan-Specific Health Checkups Study 
The Japan-Specific Health Checkups study (J-SHC) data can be accessed by researchers by submitting an application (Department of Chronic Kidney Disease Initiatives, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine, 1-Hikarigaoka, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan; phone and Fax: +81-24-547- 1898; Email dckdi@fmu.ac.jp) and receiving approval. 
The J-SHC study was based on individual risk assessments determined by the Specific Health Checkup for all inhabitants of Japan between 40 and 74 years old, which is covered by the Japanese national health insurance system.10 The purpose of the Specific Health Checkup is to maintain a healthy life through the prevention of lifestyle diseases, and it excludes people who have been hospitalized for >6 months or who are living in a support facility or nursing home. With permission from the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, participant deaths were identified by linking data from this study to a death certificate database that records all deaths that occur in Japan. All participants were prospectively followed up until they reached 75 years of age. 
Data used in this study were obtained from 664927 men and women who participated in health checkups from 2008 to 2015 in eastern and western Japan. Among the 664927 individuals, 130 549 were excluded from this study because of a lack of essential data, including SBP, DBP, body mass index (BMI), smoking habit, alcohol consumption habit, and use of antihypertensive and antihyperglycemic medication. Therefore, 534 378 men and women were included in the statistical analyses. The outcome was AD death, which was determined from a review of the death certificates and classified according to the death code until April 1, 2015 (code I710 in International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision). At health checkups, participants were seated with back support, and the BP was measured 2 times without conversation after resting for at least 5 minutes. BP was determined by an average of 2 BP readings. Hypertension was defined as SBP/DBP ≥140/90 mmHg or the use of antihypertensive medication. Diabetes was defined as fasting plasma glucose ≥126 mg/dL and glycosylated hemoglobin A1c ≥6.5% or use of antihyperglycemic 

medication. Dyslipidemia was defined as high-density lipoprotein cholesterol <40 mg/dL, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol ≥140 mg/dL, and triglycerides ≥150 mg/dL or use of lipid- lowering medication. History of coronary artery disease was determined from self-report. 
All procedures performed in the studies involving human participants were done in accordance with the guidelines of the institutional ethics committee (Yamagata University, 2008, No. 103) or the national research committee (the Ethical Guidelines for Medical and Health Research Involving Human Subjects enacted by the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japan11). In the context of this guidance, the investigators were not required to obtain informed consent, but we publicized information concerning this study on the web12 and ensured opportunities for the research participants to refuse the use of their personal information. 
Statistical analyses were performed with the JMP software program, version 12 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and R 3.0.2 with additional packages, including Rcmdr, Epi, pROC, and PredictABEL. Continuous and categorical variables were compared by use of a t test and χ2 test, respectively. Cox proportional hazard analysis was performed to obtain hazard ratios of AD death for SBP and DBP (ordinal categorical and continuous variables) and hypertension adjusted for the age, sex, BMI, smoking, region, dyslipidemia, diabetes, and coronary artery disease. For ordinal BP categories, the P value for linear trend was also calculated with the Wald test. The population-attributable risk percentage was calculated as the percent of the incidence rate of AD death in the entire population that could be attributed to an exposure. A value of P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. 


UK Biobank 
The UK Biobank study data can be accessed by researchers by submitting an application13 and receiving approval. 
The UK Biobank was a large-scale prospective cohort study conducted to improve the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of a range of diseases, and the data included in this study were obtained from 502 424 participants ranging from 40 to 69 years of age from 2006 to 2010.14 The UK Biobank received ethics approval from the North West Multi-Center Research Ethics Committee (11/NW/03820). Participants were recruited from contact information obtained from the National Health Service in the United Kingdom. Invitations to participate in the study were sent by mail to 9 million people, and the UK Biobank enrolled voluntary participants, regardless of their health status, after receipt of their written informed consent. 
After the enrollment of participants, the UK Biobank col- lected health-related data using questionnaires, physical examinations, and biological samples in the initial assess- ment. Participants with a history of AD (n=63) were excluded from this analysis. The follow-up of the cohort was conducted through the linkage of routinely available national health records such as death registrations and hospital inpatient epi- sodes. The primary outcome of this study was the incidence of AD recorded as the International Classification of Disease, 10th Revision code I710 in the hospital admission or death record. The BP was measured at the initial assessment with a prede- termined method (Methods in the Supplemental Material), and hypertension was defined as BP ≥140/90 mmHg or a diagno- sis in the past. The medical history was determined from self- reports at the initial assessment. Deprivation was based on the 
Townsend area deprivation index derived from UK census; pos- itive and negative scores correspond to higher and lower levels of deprivation, respectively, than the national averages.15 Data were censored at the date of the AD diagnosis or death, death resulting from any other cause, loss to follow-up, or February 16, 2018, for England and Wales and December 16, 2017, for Scotland, whichever occurred first. 
Statistical analyses were conducted with the Stata soft- ware package, version 14.1 (StataCorp, College Station, TX). To compare participants’ baseline characteristics, t tests were used for continuous variables, and χ2 tests were used for cat- egorical variables. A χ2 test for trend was used for ordinal cat- egorical variables. Associations between BP/hypertension and risk of AD were investigated with Cox proportional hazards models with adjustment for age, sex, smoking status, connec- tive tissue disease, BMI, and diabetes. For ordinal BP catego- ries, P values for linear trend were also calculated with the Wald test. Age- and sex-adjusted population-attributable risk percentages were subsequently calculated with the PUNAF Stata module.16 Associations between SBP and DBP and the risk of AD adjusted with multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression models were explored using restricted cubic splines with 3 knots, and nonlinearity of the associations was tested. If the association was nonlinear, the exponential dose response was tested. Adjusted hazard ratios and 95% CIs for each unit of BP were computed and plotted against the reference val- ues: 120 mmHg for SBP and 80 mmHg for DBP. A value of P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis 
The systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines. The study protocol of our review was registered in PROSPERO, the interna- tional database of prospectively registered systematic reviews (CRD42018096916). Three authors (M.H., H.H., and DA) used PubMed and EMBASE databases to search for relevant pub- lications from the inception of the databases up to May 17, 2021, and the search returns were screened by 2 of those authors (M.H., H.H.). Details concerning the search terms used are given in Table S1. 
One study,8 which analyzed the association between type 2 diabetes and the incidence of AD but also contained data on hypertension, was identified in a separate search. Published retrospective or prospective cohort studies and nested case- control studies within prospective studies were eligible for inclusion. Publications with relative risk (RR) estimates (risk ratios, incidence rate ratios, odds ratios, or hazard ratios) for the association between BP or hypertension and the risk of AD adjusted for at least 1 confounding variable were included. For 1 study6 in which the AD incidence data were available for hypertension and categorical BP stratified by a confounding variable, the Mantel-Haenszel method was used to calculate weighted-average RRs for hypertension adjusted for the con- founding variable with the 95% CI, and logistic regression was used to calculate the adjusted odds ratio for each BP category. The results from the present J-SHC Study and UK Biobank analyses were included alongside the previously published studies in the meta-analysis. 
The random-effects model by DerSimonian and Laird,17 which accounts for both within- and between-study variance, was used to calculate the summary RRs for the association between hypertension and BP and AD. Because all the stud- ies included in the analyses of SBP/DBP reported risk esti- mates on a continuous scale, these risk estimates were used directly for the nonlinear dose-response meta-analysis. A potential nonlinear dose-response relationship between BP and AD was tested with fractional polynomial models, and the best-fitting second-order fractional polynomial regression model was determined.18 A likelihood ratio test was used to test nonlinearity by comparing the nonlinear and linear mod- els.18 Asymmetry in the funnel plot was assessed by a visual inspection. The quality of the studies was evaluated with the relevant Newcastle-Ottawa Scale.19 Subgroup analyses were conducted to clarify whether the results were consistent across study characteristics (eg, sex, duration of follow-up, geographic location, study quality, study outcome definition, and adjustment for confounding factors), and random-effects meta-regression analyses were used to test for differences between subgroups. To ensure that the results were not driven by 1 very large study or a study with an extreme result, sensitivity analyses were conducted by omitting 1 study at a time from the analyses and assessing the effect on the overall results. 
RESULTS J-SHC Study 
Among 534378 participants, 84 died of AD dur- ing a median of 4.0 years of follow-up (interquartile range, 2.7–5.0 years). The AD death rate was 4.18 per 100000 person-years. Participants who died of AD were older and more likely to be male and smok- ers and had a higher SBP, DBP, and prevalence of hypertension than participants without AD (Table 1). In the age- and sex-adjusted Cox proportional haz- ards model, there were significant associations be- tween SBP, DBP, and hypertension and incidence of AD deaths, with hazard ratios of 2.23 (95% CI, 1.14– 4.67) for SBP ≥140 mmHg versus <120 mmHg, 4.00 (95% CI, 2.36–6.75) for DBP ≥90 mmHg ver- sus <80 mmHg, and 3.58 (95% CI, 2.19–6.11) for hypertension (Table 2). These associations persisted in the multivariable models with further adjustment for BMI, smoking status, region, dyslipidemia, diabe- tes, and coronary artery disease, with hazard ratios of 2.37 (95% CI, 1.21–5.03) for SBP ≥140 mm Hg ver- sus <120 mm Hg, 3.80 (95% CI, 2.25–6.45) for DBP ≥90 mm Hg versus <80 mm Hg, and 3.57 (95% CI, 2.17–6.11) for hypertension. The estimated popula- tion-attributable risk percentage was 58% for individ- uals with hypertension compared with those without, 52% for SBP above the reference category (≥120 mmHg), and 61% for DBP above the reference cat- egory (≥80 mmHg). In the sensitivity analyses with participants without antihypertensive drugs at base- line, these associations were preserved with mildly or moderately high hazard ratios (Table S2a). 
UK BIOBANK
Among the 502424 participants without a history of AD, 182 participants developed AD during a median of 9.0 years of follow-up (interquartile range, 8.3–9.7 years), during which time 63 of those participants died of AD. The incidence of AD was 4.1 per 100 000 per- son-years. Participants who developed AD were older, were more likely to be male and current smokers, and had higher SBP, DBP, and prevalence of hypertension and connective tissue disease than participants with- out AD (Table 3). In the age- and sex-adjusted Cox proportional hazards model, there were significant associations between SBP, DBP, and hypertension and the incidence of AD, with hazard ratios of 4.77 (95% CI, 1.92–11.87) for SBP ≥180 mmHg versus <120 mmHg, 12.43 (95% CI, 6.80–22.72) for DBP ≥110 mm Hg versus <80 mm Hg, and 2.70 (95% CI, 1.80–4.05) for hypertension (Table 4). The estimated population-attributable risk percentage was 53% for individuals with hypertension compared with those without, 62% for SBP above the reference category (≥120 mmHg), and 36% for DBP above the refer- ence category (≥80 mmHg). The significant associa- tions persisted in the multivariable models with further adjustment for the smoking status, connective tissue disease, BMI, and diabetes with hazard ratios of 4.69 (95% CI, 1.88–11.68) for SBP ≥180 mmHg versus <120 mmHg, 11.82 (95% CI, 6.43–21.72) for DBP ≥110 mm Hg versus <80 mm Hg, and 2.68 (95% CI, 1.78–4.04) for hypertension (Table 4). 
We conducted a further sensitivity analysis excluding participants with antihypertensive drugs at baseline and a sensitivity analysis with AD death outcomes, and the results were nearly identical except for unstable esti- mates in the AD death analysis attributable to the low number of AD deaths (Table S2b and S2c). Associations between SBP and DBP and AD adjusted for age, sex, smoking status, connective tissue disease, BMI, and dia- betes in Cox regression were modeled using restricted cubic spline with 3 knots (Figure S1 and Table S3). The associations between SBP and DBP and AD were non- linear (Pnonlinearity=0.0030 and <0.0001, respectively) and showed an exponential dose-response curve (both P<0.0001). The positive relationship between the risk of AD and DBP was steeper than that between the risk of AD and SBP, consistent with the categorical analyses. 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis 
A total of 3283 publications (1244 publications from PubMed database, and 2038 publications from EM- BASE database, and 1 publication8 from a separate search) were identified by the literature search (Fig- ure 1). A total of 692 duplicates were excluded, as were 2591 unique records because they were deemed irrelevant on the basis of their titles or abstracts. The full-text articles of 153 potentially relevant publications were thus further examined, and 6 publications were ultimately included in the systematic review and meta- analysis, in addition to the current analysis of the J- SHC study and UK Biobank (Table 5).5–8,20,21 
Adjusted RRs were calculated for the Whitehall Study6 (Table S4). The average Newcastle-Ottawa Scale score was 7.3 of 9 (Table S5). Two studies (Whitehall Study and J-SHC study) reported AD mortality, whereas the remaining studies included both hospital admissions and deaths resulting from AD. All of the included studies found that hypertension or a high BP at baseline was a significant risk factor for AD. 
Hypertension and AD 
Seven cohort studies5–8 (2818 AD cases and 4 563 501 participants) were included in the meta-analysis of hy- pertension and risk of AD. The summary RR of AD for individuals with hypertension versus individuals without hypertension was 3.07 (95% CI, 2.15–4.38; I2=76.7%, Pheterogeneity<0.001; Figure 2). In the sensitivity analysis, the summary RR was not substantially altered when each of the studies was omitted from the analyses sequen- tially (Figure S2). Although an inspection of the funnel plot indicated asymmetry (Figure S3), this was attenu- ated when a large Swedish registry–based study con- ducted by Avdic et al,8 which found a weaker association than the other studies, was excluded (Figure S4). This study also explained the observed heterogeneity, and the summary RR was 3.40 (95% CI, 2.73–4.22; I2=0%, Pheterogeneity=0.69) when it was excluded. 
Subgroup and meta-regression analyses were carried out to explore potential sources of heterogeneity (Table S6). The positive association between hypertension and risk of AD persisted across all subgroup analyses, includ- ing subgroups defined by the duration of follow-up (<10 years versus ≥10 years), sex, geographic location of the study, study quality score assessed by the Newcastle- Ottawa Scale, study outcome definition (AD mortality versus AD incidence), and adjustment for confounding variables (smoking status, lipid status, coronary artery disease, diabetes, BMI, and education level; Table S6). There was no evidence of heterogeneity between sub- groups except for the subgroups with and without adjust- ment for education level (Pheterogeneity=0.005); however, the only study with such adjustment was the study con- ducted by Avdic et al.8 
BP and AD 
Three studies,20 including the present studies (289 cases and 1044484 participants), were included in the meta-analysis of SBP and the risk of AD, and 3 studies6 (including the present ones; 304 cases and 1055205 participants) were included in the meta-analysis of DBP and AD. The summary RR of AD per 20–mmHg increase in SBP was 1.39 (95% CI, 1.16–1.66, I2 = 47.7% and Pheterogeneity=0.15) and that per 10–mm Hg in- crease in DBP was 1.79 (95% CI, 1.51–2.12, I2=57.0% and Pheterogeneity=0.10; Figure 2). In the nonlinear dose- response analyses, there was evidence of nonlinearity (Pnonlinearity=0.0007) and a very strong dose-response re- lationship between SBP and AD (Figure 3 and Table S7). There was a very strong dose-response relationship be- tween DBP and AD, and the test for nonlinearity showed statistical significance (Pnonlinearity=0.0008). The 95% CIs of the RRs were >1.0 at SBP >132 mmHg and DBP >75 mmHg, suggesting a risk of AD even within a high normal BP range. 
DISCUSSION 
Our analyses include 2 of the largest cohort studies con- ducted to date concerning the association between BP and the risk of AD. This is also the first systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies on the association between hypertension and BP and the risk of AD. The risk of AD was 2- and 5-fold higher than in the refer- ence group with an elevated SBP and 4- and 12-fold higher than in the reference group with an elevated DBP in the J-SHC study and UK Biobank, respectively. An important finding was there was a 2- to 3-fold higher risk of AD even within the normal SBP and DBP categories than in the lowest reference category, suggesting that the optimal BP value may be considerably lower than what is considered normal BP for the prevention of AD. In addition, a roughly 3-fold higher than reference group risk was observed for individuals with hypertension in the UK Biobank, the J-SHC study, and our meta-analysis. In the UK Biobank, estimates of the population-attributable risk suggested that an SBP above the reference cat- egory (≥120 mmHg) may account for 62% of AD cas- es, whereas a DBP above the reference category (≥80 mm Hg) may account for 36% of AD cases; hypertension 
was deemed to account for 53% of cases. In the J-SHC study, hypertension was deemed to account for 53% of cases as well, and the corresponding estimates for SBP and DBP ranged between 52% and 61%. This suggests that a substantial proportion of AD cases could be pre- vented if the prevalence of hypertension or elevated BP in the general population could be reduced. 
In the meta-analysis for hypertension, significant associations between hypertension and AD persisted in subgroup and sensitivity analyses, suggesting that the result was robust and independent of other risk fac- tors for which we adjusted, including the smoking habit, lipid status, coronary artery disease, diabetes, and BMI. There was some suggestion of funnel plot asymmetry that was likely attributable to the inclusion of the study with the largest sample size and weakest association.8 Although there were a few studies in each of the meta- analyses for BP, they both showed a positive dose- response relationship between increasing SBP or DBP and the risk of AD, with a notably steeper association with DBP. Of note, we observed some risk of AD even within the normal BP range. 
Two biological mechanisms have been suggested to contribute to the development of AD when patients are exposed to elevated BP. One mechanism is AD with few pathological changes of atherosclerosis, which is com- monly seen in type A AD.22,23 In this mechanism, the hypertensive status is associated with a loss of elastic 
fibers in the aortic media and unstable connections between each elastic lamina, resulting in AD before or after aortic aneurysm formation.24,25 Hypertension has also been shown to be related to dilatation of the ascend- ing aorta without evidence of atherosclerosis.26–28 Such ascending aortic aneurysmal changes increase aortic wall stress29 and have been reported to increase the risk of AD drastically.30 The vulnerability of the ascending aorta to having a dissection or contracting an aneurysm by exposure to hypertension has been suggested to be driven by genetic factors.22 Another mechanism from elevated BP that may contribute to the development of AD is atherosclerosis, which is commonly seen in type B AD.31,32 Hypertension has been reported to be a major cause of atherosclerosis and aneurysmal formation by impairing repair processes.33 
There is uncertainty about the predictive reliability between SBP and DBP. In the study of Strachan et al,6 DBP was a stronger predictor of aortic diseases, includ- ing AD, than SBP; however, Reed et al20 found a stron- ger association with SBP than with DBP. In terms of vascular mortality, a meta-analysis of prospective stud- ies suggested that SBP and DBP were similarly predic- tive across all ages, with an effect size ≈2-fold higher in DBP than in SBP.34 In addition, a meta-analysis of BP and the risk of abdominal aortic aneurysm showed sig- nificant associations for both SBP and DBP, albeit with a considerably stronger association for DBP,35 which is consistent with the current findings. The dose-response 
relationship between DBP and AD was exponential in shape in the UK Biobank, but the nonlinearity was less pronounced in our meta-analysis. These findings high- light the importance of BP management. The associa- tions between hypertension and BP and AD, which were reinforced in this meta-analysis, provide further impetus to support public health promotion to reduce and control hypertension. Although the risk of AD in certain popula- tions is also determined by unmodifiable factors, hyper- tension remains a major modifiable risk factor for AD, and populations can reduce the risk of AD through the prevention and management of hypertension. 
The prospective large-scale cohort study design that is based on the general population is a major strength of both the J-SHC study and UK Biobank because it reduces the possibility for information bias. However, several limitations associated with the present studies warrant mention. First, neither cohort was not represen- tative of the general population with regard to several participant characteristics; therefore, they cannot be used to provide representative disease prevalence and incidence rates. Specifically, a healthy volunteer selec- tion bias in the UK Biobank has been reported, with participants more likely to live in less socioeconomically deprived area and thus have a healthier lifestyle.36 How- ever, a valid assessment of exposure-disease relation- ships can be obtained. Second, there were no data on the history of AD at baseline in the J-SHC study, and for this reason, we were unable to exclude participants 
with prevalent AD; however, we believe that the impact of this was limited because AD is a rare and highly fatal disease. Third, the inclusion of AD deaths without cap- ture of AD incidence is a limitation in the J-SHC study. The richness of the baseline data allowed us to explore possible confounders and to adjust for the effects of additional variables in the UK Biobank study. Fourth, mis- classification of both the exposure and outcome such as that resulting from coding inaccuracy in administrative or medical databases is another possible limitation of our cohort studies and the studies included in the meta- analysis. However, if such misclassification occurred, it would most likely have been nondifferential with regard to the exposure and outcome status because of the prospective design of the studies, so the calculated risk estimates would tend to be biased toward the null and thus underestimated.37 Fifth, the hypertension status or BP was assessed at baseline in the cohort studies but may have changed over the follow-up period, so using the baseline measurement may not have adequately represented the exposure level during follow-up, leading to regression dilution bias. However, some reports found 
that baseline BP was a better predictor of cardiovascu- lar diseases than current BP.38 Finally, despite millions of patient-years of observation, there were a total of 266 AD events to analyze in our cohorts, suggesting that clinical action may be challenging, given the colossal numbers needed to be treated to prevent an AD event; however, the benefits of reducing the BP may extend to other cardiovascular diseases as well.39 
The main limitation of the current meta-analysis is the low number of published studies that were included in the analyses. There were also few published studies on the relationship between the SBP or DBP and AD, likely attributable to the relative rarity of the disease, which lim- ited the possibility of conducting subgroup and sensitiv- ity analyses and testing for funnel plot asymmetry in the analyses of SBP and DBP. The study outcome was AD mortality in the 2 studies (Whitehall Study and J-SHC study), whereas the outcome was AD incidence in the other 6 studies, and we found no significant heteroge- neity between these subgroups in the meta-analysis. This is not surprising given the relatively high fatality rate in AD. The number of cases in the studies included in 
the meta-analysis ranged from 23 to 188, with 1 par- ticularly large population-wide Swedish study enrolling 2219 cases.8 Both the heterogeneity and funnel plot asymmetry observed in the meta-analysis appeared to be explained by this Swedish study, which had the small- est effect size but the highest weight among the stud- ies. The weak associations observed in this study may have resulted from the crude nature of the registry- based data; for example, hypertensive medication use was used as a proxy for hypertension status and may have led to misclassification and likely attenuation of the observed risk estimates, unadjusted or residual negative confounding attributable to a lack of data on lifestyle factors, or the inclusion of several highly correlated and potentially intermediate cardiovascular conditions in the multivariable model. 
Our analyses are important for public health because they provide the first summary of the evidence from pro- spective cohort studies on the association of BP and hypertension with the risk of AD, improving the evidence base from being based on reports of case series to an actual estimate of the RR. This study also provides esti- mates of attributable risk, which were consistent with those in a previous Swedish study.5 Although further studies are needed, the current results suggest that reducing BP, through either healthy lifestyle or medi- cations, may consequently reduce the incidence of AD and furthermore that the optimal target BP may be even lower than the current cutoff for normal BP. 
Conclusions 
The analyses of the J-SHC study and UK Biobank and the meta-analysis of 8 cohort studies showed a roughly 3-fold higher risk of AD in individuals with hypertension than in individuals without hypertension. The risk of AD was positively dose dependent even within the normal BP range in the J-SHC study, UK Biobank study, and meta- analysis. In the nonlinear dose-response meta-analysis, a high versus low SBP and DBP was associated with an ≈3- and 20-fold higher risk of AD, respectively, than the reference group. These results confirm previous obser- vations that a high BP is an important risk factor for AD and provide precise estimates of the associated risks. 
