
As the amount of genomic data for nonmodel taxa grows, it is increasingly clear that gene flow across species barriers in insects is much more common than previously thought. In recent years, the decreased cost and increased accuracy of long-read sequencing has enabled the assembly of high- quality reference genomes and chromosome maps for nonmodel insects. With this long-read data, we can now not only compare variation across the genome among homologous genes between species, which has been the basis of phylogenetics for more than 30 years, but also tease apart evidence of ancient and recent hybridization and gene flow. The implications of hybridization for species adaptation may be more positive than previously considered, explaining its prevalence across many groups of insects. Unfortunately, due to anthropogenic actions, some pest species appear to be benefitting from hybridization and gene flow, facilitating future invasions.


Hybridization may not be an anomaly Hybridization between species had always been con- sidered a rare event, an evolutionary fluke that usually results in wasted reproductive effort. In fact, one of Darwin’s primary questions regarded sterility and ferti- lity in hybrids. It was thought that when crossing in- dividuals, if the offspring failed to develop or were


sterile, it suggested that the two parents were separate species (biological species concept). However, we know now that this is an oversimplification of the evolutionary process and species concepts have to be more nuanced to be useful [11]. For example, reinforcement, the pro- cess by which females evolve prezygotic reproductive barriers, is thought to be caused by selection against hybridization [33]. The benefits to individuals, espe- cially females, of interspecific mating, were thought to be typically outweighed by the risk of hybrid inviability, or lower fitness due to factors such as a lack of adaptation to either parent species’ particular niches [25]. However, the advent of widespread genomic data shows that hy- bridization between species is far more common than previously understood [18]. This not only has implica- tions for understanding the process of speciation but also practical consequences and it changes the outcomes we may expect from increased globalization.

Especially for economically important insects, hy- bridization and gene flow are postulated to be the cause of much of the taxonomic confusion in many species complexes. For example, the Oriental fruit fly, Bactrocera dorsalis, and its sister species are major global economic pests that have been shown to share mtDNA due to introgression, which hinders species identification [23,3,8]. Helicoverpa armigera, the cotton bollworm, an- other polyphagous global agricultural pest, hybridizes with H. zea. Instead of being consistently dis- advantageous, such hybridization appears to increase the opportunity for novel genotypes/ecotypes that may be more pestiferous [1,5]. Hybridization in social insects, in particular, is thought to frequently increase invasive- ness [12]. Africanized honeybees, Apis mellifera scutellata, are a well-known example where the hybrid is much more aggressive than either of its parental lineages [4]. In ants, Solenopsis geminata and S. xyloni can hybridize where these species are sympatric [27]. Solenopsis xyloni colonies contain multiple queens and when they mate with S. geminata queens, they only produce workers, not males. Hybrid workers display greater forging efficiency and hardiness than nonhybrid workers, increasing the fitness of the hybrid colony [2]. In termites, Coptotermes formosanus and C. gestroi naturally hybridize where they overlap and hybrid colonies grow twice as fast and dis- play wider thermal tolerances than either parental spe- cies [22]. However, it may be expected that the effects





of hybridization are a mix of evolutionarily beneficial and detrimental consequences, leading to complex patterns of reproductive barriers between taxa that do not always reflect phylogenetic proximity. Indeed, Limnoporus water striders exemplify this potential complexity where a sister species pair that comes into direct contact, maintains barriers to gene flow, while more distantly related, nonparapatric species does not, potentially en- abling more gene flow across more distantly related taxa [26].

Technical challenges
Although molecular data have been vital for under- standing gene flow, not all data are equally useful, and in the last 50 years, major advances in DNA sequencing technologies have been critical to our increased under- standing of the importance of hybridization. Not all published genomes are equal and although studies re- lying on ‘genomic’ data have been coming out for dec- ades, there is a distinct difference in recently published genomes in terms of number and length of contigs and completeness of the genomes due to increased adoption of new sequencing technologies. The most popular second-generation genome sequencing technology (Illumina) uses a sequencing-by-synthesis approach whereby DNA is cut into short fragments and the terminal ends of these fragments are sequenced, usually providing reads between 25 and 300 base pairs (bp) in length. Although highly cost-effective and accurate, this approach has major shortcomings due to the short-read length and the computational intensity needed to ac- curately align potentially billions of short reads into larger contigs, thus usually failing to generate chromo- some-size contigs (Figure 1a). Without complementary

data from other approaches such as chromatin con- formation capture (Hi-C) or optical mapping, a genome obtained using only short-read sequencing can have tens to hundreds of thousands of contigs for which the pla- cement in the original genome is uncertain, and will likely contain large gaps and regions with high ambiguity due to repetitive segments of DNA (Figure 1a). This severely limits the detection of large structural genomic changes because the orientation of short contigs in re- lation to the original genome and copy number variation is hard to determine when assembling genomes with short fragments. But these large structural variations may have significant effects on the expressed phenotype of the individual, altering its fitness.

In contrast, third-generation sequencing approaches (e.g. Pacific Biosciences and Oxford Nanopore systems) use single-molecule sequencing to read large pieces of DNA (15 kbp to 1 Mbp), making the assembly of reads far less computationally intensive and resulting in contigs up to a chromosome in size (Figure 1b). While earlier iterations of these technologies were plagued with low accuracy due to a high noise-to-signal ratio, this has been solved with new approaches that allow for the repeated se- quencing of a single DNA molecule. Pacific Biosciences’ HiFi sequencing circularizes large fragments of DNA (10–25 kbp) and binds it to a DNA polymerase that al- lows it to be sequenced repeatedly (> 3 times). Then, circle consensus sequencing software is used to derive a consensus sequence from the multiple-sequencing passes of that single DNA molecule providing accuracy levels similar to second-generation sequencing. Oxford Nanopore’s new technology combines the nanopore se- quencing Q20+ kit with the R10.4 flow cell resulting in a


Figure 1


Schematic representation of the difference between short-read and long-read sequencing for contig assembly. (a) After short-read sequencing, also known as shotgun sequencing, many contigs are produced that cannot be combined to reconstruct the full chromosome due to areas with lower sequencing coverage or repeats that could not be aligned. (b) The assembly of long-read sequences can produce chromosome-size contigs. Note that this is a simplified representation and read coverage for both approaches is typically aimed to be 20? or higher.





qualitative improvement over the accuracy of the pre- vious kits. This combination can produce duplex reads that sequence DNA from both strands into one basecall to increase single-molecule accuracy and can pro- duce reads from 50 kbp up to 260 kbp in length. As such, third-generation sequencing now allows for computa- tionally more accessible assembly of reference-quality genomes at a much lower cost than previous technologies that required multiple different sequencing approaches to be used in conjunction to piece together the same information that is now produced in a single run (de- pending on genome size). This has revolutionized the study of structural genomic differences between non- model organisms, and made an assessment of the fre- quency of changes to genomic architecture and how these relate to reproductive barriers and hybridization feasible.

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are slowly acquired over time were originally thought to make up the majority of the standing genetic variation within and among species [19], and the building blocks on which evolutionary selection acts. Indeed, genome-wide SNP data have proven invaluable for disentangling species

complexes and understanding phylogenetic relationships [21,6]. However, through assembly of reference genomes and long-read sequencing, it is now clear that structural genomic variation (Figure 2) also represents a significant source of the standing variation on which evolution can operate, and it may be key to understanding why most phylogenetic relationships cannot be resolved as fully bifurcating trees [32]. Structural genomic variation is a region of DNA that shows a change in composition (Figure 2a and b), orientation and order (Figure 2c and d), and/or copy number (Figure 2e and f). Such changes can involve both coding and noncoding regions of the genome, including those in highly repetitive elements, such as transposons [28]. Structural variation can have significant effects on the phenotypes of species and po- pulations. Adaptive traits have been shown to be asso- ciated with structural variants. For example, copy number variation is associated with insecticide resistance in a number of species. Two populations of fall armyworm, Spodoptera frugiperda, show copy number variation of de- toxification genes that are correlated with insecticide re- sistance [13]. The mosquito Anopheles funestus has had multiple independent gene duplication events across Africa, which were associated with insecticide resistance


Figure 2


Processes resulting in structural genomic variants that can now be detected in nonmodel taxa using long-read DNA sequencing. (a) Chromosome fission: one chromosome splits into two. (b) Chromosome fusion: two chromosomes fuse to become one. (c) A section of the chromosome is inverted, changing the order of genes. (d) Translocation, commonly involving transposable elements, where a section of the chromosome ‘jumps’ to another location on the same or a different chromosome. (e) Deletion: a section of chromosome is lost. (f) Duplication: a section of chromosome is duplicated.





in response to increased use of insecticide-treated bed nets [31]. In Rhagoletis fruit flies, inversions were found to affect diapause, allowing populations to adapt to different host fruit phenologies [10]. In Timema stick insects, a megabase-size ‘supermutation’ has deleted color loci in green morphs [29]. Structural variants can also have con- sequences for gene regulation or disruption, as well as gametic compatibility affecting the ability to form viable hybrid zygotes, and thereby can affect gene flow within populations and between species [20,15]. Introgression of an inversion polymorphism has been found in Heliconius butterflies [9,24] and shared inversions may effectively open gene flow between certain species pairs but shut off gene flow between others. Like morphological re- productive incompatibility, structural variations of the chromosomes could provide another layer of gene flow isolation, blocking gene exchange for many but not all

species combinations. Synteny, the comparison of the order of genes or genomic structures among genomes, can be used to identify shared structural variation and provide invaluable insights in identifying gene flow events throughout the evolutionary history of a species group. This information could allow us to define more mean- ingful species delimitation, and more realistic phyloge- netic trees that include historical gene flow.

However, much work remains to be done. One aspect of hybridization and gene flow that needs further attention is the transmission and maintenance of adaptive alleles across different populations and species boundaries. At the early stages of introgression, these adaptive alleles can be difficult to maintain due to drift, as recombination may ‘purify’ and remove such rare alleles, preserving the original genome. However, if multiple adaptive alleles


Figure 3


Venn diagram as a representation of a pan-genomic study. Each colored circle represents a reference genome. Where circles overlap, variance among those genomes is shared. There is a core set of genes shared among all genomes in the center of the diagram. Pan-genomic data can be used to study various aspects of evolution that were impossible to study with other types of genetic data.





are close together in regions of low recombination, they may be preserved.

Future directions
We expect that, in the not-so-distant future, single-mo- lecule sequencing will be cost-effective enough to allow researchers to sequence reference-quality genomes from multiple individuals across multiple populations and species to conduct pan-genomic studies (Figure 3). A pan-genome represents the entire set of variation within a species, a core set of genes found throughout all in- dividuals, and an auxiliary set of genomic variation from which evolution can act upon to bring about apparent phenotypes. Previously limited to simple genomes, this approach can now be used for organisms with more complex genomes. With these data, we could determine position, copy number, and orientation of adaptive al- leles in a group of species and populations. This could reveal the mechanisms by which evolution is acting on such genes and how these adaptive alleles are main- tained in the face of recombination and drift. Other promising avenues of research based on third-generation sequencing genomic data include higher-quality se- quenced genomes that allow for the detection of mi- crochromosomes — that were recently shown to be prevalent in birds and squamates but lost in mammals through chromosome fusion events [30]. Chromosome number variation varies widely within insects, with le- pidoptera the most variable order, averaging 30 chro- mosomes, but ranging from 7 to 190 [14]. The presence of microchromosomes in insects has not yet been clar- ified and they may have been ignored as staining arti- facts in karyology studies, as they had been for birds [30]. Three-dimensional structure of the genome has also recently been shown to be an important contributor to diversification in a group of Anopheles mosquitos [16]. While the relationship between chromosome conforma- tion and gene regulation is still unclear, disruption of chromatin domains and domain boundaries can lead to misexpression of genes that can affect fitness and pro- vide interesting avenues for further investigation.

Conclusion
The existence of gene flow through interspecies hy- bridization is not a new discovery, but it had been con- sidered a rare phenomenon, or even an evolutionary anomaly, that was restricted to certain taxa [17,7] and certainly not an evolutionary force of significance across insects. The newer DNA sequencing technologies can now be used to elucidate not only the prevalence of gene flow throughout the insect tree of life, but also we can now try to understand how hybrid genomes work, what the evolutionary impacts of hybridization are on a genomic scale, and exactly how often this model of evolution occurs across insects. While there will be many challenges ahead, ultimately, these technologies will

result in a new understanding of species limits and how species evolve and adapt. This is all the more relevant considering the rapid pace of global change, specifically climate change and globalization, both isolating and connecting different biotas under new and challenging circumstances. Last, hybridization has important ramifi- cations not only for understanding the process of evo- lution but also practically, to identify pest species and understand how they may be rapidly adapting and be- coming increasingly invasive.
